# Presentations


**Traffic-Related Emergency Department Visits As Measure of Social Distancing during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Cook County, IL**
*Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists Annual Conference, June 15, 2021, Virtual*

BACKGROUND: Social distancing is an important prevention measure against community spread of SARS-CoV-2. Companies such as Apple and Google have released mobility data to help measure local social distancing trends. However, counties are the smallest geographic unit available and the companies are not committed to providing data in perpetuity. State and local jurisdictions may benefit from more granular, reliable measures of social distancing. We observed an inverse relationship between traffic-related emergency department (ED) visits and visits for COVID-like illness (CLI), suggesting it may be a good indicator of people staying home during COVID-19 surges in our area. 

METHODS: ED visits for CLI and traffic-related injuries were extracted from NSSP ESSENCE using the ‘CLI CC with CLI DD and Coronavirus DD v1’ and ‘All Traffic Related v2’ queries. Mobility data from Apple and Google were utilized for validation of traffic-related ED visits as a measure of social distancing. All data were analyzed for MMWR weeks 10-50. 

RESULTS: The percent of ED visits for CLI increased 235% from 2019 to 2020, while the percent of ED visits for traffic-related injuries decreased 11% in our jurisdiction. In 2020, traffic and CLI ED visits by week were inversely correlated (Pearson’s r, -0.84; 95% CI, -0.71:-0.91). Our jurisdiction is comprised of four public health districts. In our district with the fewest COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations and highest median income, the percent of ED visits for traffic-related injuries decreased 23% from 2019-2020. In our district with the most COVID-19 hospitalizations and the lowest median income, the percent of ED visits for traffic-related injuries increased 2% during this time period. Weekly percent of ED visits for traffic-related injuries was significantly correlated with Apple maps usage for driving directions in our county (Pearson’s r, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.85:0.96), and was negatively correlated with Google data approximating visits to residential locations (Pearson’s r, -0.67; 95% CI, -0.45:-0.81). 

CONCLUSIONS: Syndromic surveillance data for traffic-related ED visits could be used as a proxy for social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is significantly correlated with data approximating the amount people are driving in our county, and inversely correlated with data approximating the number of people staying at residential locations and with CLI rates in our jurisdiction. Furthermore, this data can be used at a more granular level than publicly available mobility data and revealed potential disparities in the ability to stay home during a pandemic for those hardest-hit in our jurisdiction.

___

**Communicating public health data with Shiny: West Nile virus risk, school vaccination rates, health equity, and more**
*RStudio Conference, January 28, 2020*

The Cook County Department of Public Health (CCDPH) is a local health department that serves 2.5 million residents in the suburbs surrounding Chicago. The Communicable Disease Unit at CCDPH tracks around 15,000 cases of over sixty infectious diseases and conditions each year. We use this data to better understand infectious disease burden in our community, detect outbreaks, and prevent further infections. We also want to make accessing this health data more flexible and user-friendly for the public as well as our internal staff. Over the past two years, we have created a [suite of Shiny apps](https://ccdphcd.shinyapps.io/home/) that allow users to explore aggregated case data, compare infectious disease rates in our county through a health equity lens, examine school vaccination trends and find and interpret their school’s vaccination rates, and track local flu and West Nile virus seasons as they develop.

___

**[Making Infectious Disease and Health Equity Data Accessible through an Interactive Online Application](https://cste.confex.com/cste/2019/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/10625)**
*Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists Annual Conference, June 3, 2019*

BACKGROUND: Cook County Department of Public Health (CCDPH) serves a diverse population of over 2 million individuals in 125 municipalities with wide disparities in terms of health outcomes and social determinants of health. In the past, publicly-accessible data from the Communicable Disease Unit at CCDPH were available only as static tables or PDF surveillance reports. One area of focus in CCDPH’s 2018 strategic plan is to make accessing heath data more flexible and user-friendly. The Shiny package in R is open source and allows for the creation of interactive online applications directly within RStudio with relative ease for anyone with a basic understanding of R programming. With this tool, and without the need for outside contractors or additional funding, we created an application with interactive graphs, maps, and dashboards that increases infectious disease data accessibility in our jurisdiction through a health equity lens.

METHODS: Incidence data from 2013-2017 for 21 select infectious diseases were aggregated by Suburban Cook County (SCC) municipality, and 12 place-level social indicators were extracted from the American Community Survey 2012-2016 5-Year Data or the 2010 United States Census. The select infectious diseases include enteric illnesses, sexually transmitted infections, vaccine preventable diseases, and others. Social indicators include data on income, education, insurance status, race, ethnicity, and place of birth. An interactive health equity application was created in R v3.5.1 utilizing the Shiny v1.1.0 package.

RESULTS: The application includes interactive scatter and box plots that allow users to compare selected infectious disease rates with pre-loaded social indicators. Users can also map data by SCC municipality. If a user is interested in a specific municipality, they can easily select one, which is then highlighted in each graph and map. Furthermore, a municipality profile dashboard is generated, displaying the municipality’s size, location, income, racial/ethnic makeup, and infectious disease rates relative to the rest of SCC.

CONCLUSIONS: The Shiny package in R is an approachable tool for epidemiologists to create customizable, interactive data portals at little to no cost, and without the need for additional information technology staff or contractors. The CCDPH health equity application puts data into the hands of our community in a format that is easy to use, relatively simple to understand, and interesting to explore. This allows members of the public to better visualize health equity trends and disparities in their local communities.

___

**[Factors Associated with Inappropriate Administration of Rabies Post-Exposure Prophylaxis in Suburban Cook County, Illinois, 2015-2018](https://cste.confex.com/cste/2019/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/10677)**
*Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists Annual Conference, June 3, 2019*

BACKGROUND: Rabies is nearly 100% fatal in humans but is preventable when post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) is given promptly and correctly. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) publishes guidelines that detail when animal exposure circumstances warrant PEP administration. Failure to adhere to these guidelines results in unnecessary cost, inconvenience, and minor medical risks to the patient when PEP is given but not indicated. Potential human rabies exposures, including the initiation of PEP, are reportable in Illinois. Since 2015, the Cook County Department of Public Health (CCDPH) has engaged in continuous quality improvement initiatives to increase reporting and improve clinical quality measures related to rabies exposures. In this study, we assessed factors associated with inappropriate administration of PEP.

METHODS: Individuals who received PEP in Suburban Cook County between January 2015 and October 2018 were retrospectively evaluated for appropriateness of treatment according to ACIP guidelines. A multivariable logistic regression model was used to evaluate predictors of inappropriate PEP administration.

RESULTS: During our study period, 279 (54%) of 519 reported individuals received inappropriate administrations of PEP. Individuals who received PEP were 84% less likely to have been treated inappropriately if a local or state health department was consulted (OR 0.16, 95% CI 0.11-0.26). A health department was consulted for 163 (31%) reported PEP recipients. Exposing animal species was also associated with appropriateness of PEP administration. Compared to bats, exposure to a dog or cat was associated with greater odds of inappropriate PEP administration (OR 2.69, 95% CI 1.52-4.76; OR 5.61, 95% CI 1.73-18.14, respectively), while exposure to a raccoon was associated with reduced odds of inappropriate PEP administration (OR 0.25, 95% CI 0.09-0.72). Patient age and sex were not significantly associated with inappropriate PEP administration.

CONCLUSIONS: Consultation with a health department was the single most protective factor against inappropriate administration of PEP in Suburban Cook County. As the majority of patients were given PEP without consulting a health department, this is an area where substantial improvement can be made to reduce the burden of unnecessary PEP. Healthcare providers should be especially mindful when considering PEP for domestic animal exposures, as the likelihood of inappropriate PEP administration was significantly higher for dog and cat exposures than for bats or raccoons. The results from this analysis will allow CCDPH to implement more informed education efforts with local hospitals.



